# Gas Economics

#### Table of Contents

* [Introduction and Executive Summary](#intro)
* Part 1: Goals and Incentives

  * [What the Network Wants](#network)
  * [What Miners Want](#miners)
  * [What Clients Want](#clients)
  * [Reconciling Goals](#reconciling)

* Part 2: Transaction Execution and Contract Composition

  * [Overview of Transaction Execution Model](#execution)
  * [Hazards of Composing Contracts](#hazards)
  * [Missing Features](#missing)

## <a name="intro"></a>   Introduction and Executive Summary

Ethereum supports computationally-rich contracts, written in a Turing-complete
language. This enables a previously-unavailable variety of self-enforcing "smart
contracts", where all parties involved can be confident that their funds will be
used in a predictable fashion.

The downside of this increased flexibility is a new set of costs and threats for
the miners and verifiers which execute these programs. Turing-complete programs
cannot in general be statically analyzed to determine runtime or resource costs
(storage, stack depth, etc). Programs which deliberately (or accidentally) get
stuck in an infinite loop have the potential to stall the machine executing it.
Programs which are merely complex or CPU-intensive still might "cost" more than
the miner is willing to bear.

Ethereum compensates for this by introducing "gas", in which the initiator of a
program's execution (the transaction sender) must pay for the resources thus
consumed. This report explores the resulting "Gas Economics" model: does it
provide the right incentives and protections to miners, verifiers, clients, and
the system as a whole?

We also explore the ways in which Ethereum programs can be composed, with an eye
towards managing the incentives and risks experienced by the
cooperating/competing program authors.

_Executive Summary:_

* Ethereum's "gas" system *is* likely to meet its primary goals: enabling
complex transactions while mitigating certain Denial-of-Service attacks.
* Changes will be needed in the future, when the system grows and gas fees
replace block rewards as the primary income for miners.
* Contracts *can* be composed, but safe cooperation between mutually-distrusting
parties will require careful study and rigorous defensive programming. Some
changes to the virtual machine could be made to improve the safety of these
compositions, and higher-level analysis tools must be developed. The programming
examples included in serpent and found in the wild are flawed and inadequate for
demonstrating best practices.
* The rule that "value remains with the recipient upon exception" is
particularly surprising and difficult to work around. We highly recommend
changing this to "value reverts to the sender upon exception".

## Part 1: Goals and Incentives

## <a name="network"></a>   What the Network Wants

_Summary: Incentivized mining, client confidence, a rich ecosystem._

The end goal of Ethereum is to provide a stable and expressive computational
cryptocurrency: a system to perform decentralized verification of arbitrary
programs, which can store and transfer currency units along with traditional
data messages.

Decentralized verification depends upon majority consensus: "everybody" should
agree upon the exact inputs, order, and results of program execution. All
participants should be able to learn the full state and program code of all
contracts at any time. This allows users to correctly predict whether others
will accept their currency or not (i.e. how much they can spend). And, for the
most part, they can confidently predict what will happen when they send messages
to other contracts. The stability of the system, and people's willingness to use
it, depends upon this confidence.

"Mining" is the distributed process by which this consensus is reached. This
takes significant computational resources, for which miners expect to be
compensated. The system needs consensus; consensus depends upon miners: thus the
system needs a way to incentivize mining.

## <a name="miners"></a>   What Miners Want

_Summary: Predictable costs and income, profit optimization, DoS protection._

The Ethereum execution model is effectively a linear series of transactions.
Each transaction contains a signed instruction to send a single message to a
single account, which may cause a program to be run, resulting in changes to a
large table (the "state vector"). This table records a currency balance and
arbitrary stored data for each of a very large number of "accounts".

Clients publish transactions which they would like to be incorporated into this
evolving history. Miners choose a subset of these transactions, in some
particular order, then act upon the messages (executing programs in response) to
generate "blocks" with the resulting state vector changes. They participate in
some sort of Proof-Of-Work contest to earn the right to publish their particular
block.

"Verification" is a process that starts with a block of transactions, executes
the same messages (in the same order), and compares the results against the
block's claimed state vector. All miners are also verifiers. Many more nodes
will want to verify blocks but not perform the expensive proof-of-work function
that miners use.

### Costs and Rewards

Verification consumes CPU time, short- and long-term storage, and other overhead
costs. This is modeled (with varying accuracy, see below) as scalar units of
"**gas**": basic addition costs 1 unit, a SHA3 hash costs 10, modifying storage
costs 100, etc. More complex programs consume more gas. Long-term storage costs
must be borne indefinitely. Each transaction in a block may trigger execution of
a program; the cost to verify the block is the sum of the cost to execute each
program, plus additional overhead for the block itself (which is not recouped by
the gas fees).

On top of the costs of verification, miners may expend an arbitrarily large
amount of resources in trying to solve a proof-of-work (PoW) puzzle. The PoW
cost for each block is independent of the messages and programs included in that
block. Verifiers do not incur this cost, only miners.

Miners receive a reward for their efforts, denominated in ETH, the basic
currency unit of Ethereum. Part of the reward (`Block_Reward`) is independent of
the messages included in the block. This portion is the means by which new
currency units are introduced into the system ("expansion").

The other portion (`Program_Gas_Income`) comes from "gas": a fee paid by message
senders to cover the computational costs of program execution they have
triggered, summed over all messages included in the block. Over time, as
transaction volume increases, the income from gas is expected to dominate.

All verifiers pay the costs of verification. All potential miners pay the costs
of both verification and PoW. Only the winning miner gets the block and gas
rewards. The generally-accepted social contract is that miners will win blocks
in close proportion to their mining power.

The cost of verifying blocks is one constraint on the mining process. There are
others:

* Blocks which are too large will take a longer time to store, transmit, and
process. If two miners find and publish blocks at roughly the same time, then
the large block may lose the race to a smaller block that finishes the
verification process earlier, encouraging miners to produce smaller blocks.
* To protect the rest of the system (e.g., to prevent denial of service attacks
on verifiers and light clients), blocks are limited both by size (in bytes) and
their computational requirements (in gas). The per-block `gasLimit` is
dynamically adjusted as a moving average: see
[misc/RaisingGasLimit.md](misc/RaisingGasLimit.md) for more notes and attacks.
* Miners may have vested interests in particular contract state outcomes, for
example if a contract makes payments to miners in certain conditions, or if a
particular miner profits from a particular contract's behavior.

These constraints may encourage miners to be selective, to not include all
potential messages in their blocks, or to alter the order of messages when
creating a block. Miners can be expected to do whatever they can to maximize
their profits, even producing blocks with no messages at all.

### Predictable Profits

For each block, the average income (in ETH) is thus:

    Mining_Power_Fraction * (Block_Reward + SUM(Program_Gas_Income))

Here we make the simplifying assumption that miners are not influence by
contract outcomes.

And the CPU costs (in less well-defined units) are:

    Mining_Cost + SUM(Program_Execution_Cost)

A miner's profit is income minus cost. To maximize their profits by selectively
including some messages but not others, miners want to accurately (and cheaply)
predict both the income and cost from each transaction. Miners are nominally
faced with a income-vs-cost diagram like this:

![mining profit diagram](./images/mining-profit-1.png)

in which, as a first step, they want to determine the profit (or loss) resulting
from including any given message in their block. They want to outright reject
any non-profitable messages. When faced with constraints that limit the number
of messages they can include in a block, they will want to select the most
profitable ones. (The optimal subset is a form of knapsack problem and is not
cheap to compute, `O(2^n)`, but good-enough solutions are fairly easy to
obtain).

Ideally, for each message (program execution), the miner should be able to
predict exactly how much reward they will receive, and how much their CPU and
storage costs will be. They want to know a single point in the income/cost
diagram, and where it stands in relation to the "line of profitability":

![mining profit diagram](./images/mining-profit-2.png)

_Recommendation: research and develop algorithms and mining strategies that help
miners to predict their per-message income_

### Loose Bounds of the Current Gas-Limit System

The existing mechanisms offers an upper bound on the computational costs, but no
lower bound. These same mechanisms offer an *upper* bound on the gas income, but
no complexity-dependent *lower* bound. The result is useful for discouraging
denial-of-service attacks, but does not give miners the information that they
want to maximize their profits.

Transactions (which trigger program execution) include two parameters: the "gas
limit" (denominated in gas) and a "gas price" (ETH per gas). Miners execute
programs in a virtual machine, counting operations as they go. The moment the VM
exceeds the gas limit, execution is terminated, and all gas is forfeit (paid to
the miner). This is the most gas-related income the miner can possibly make (any
exception, including out-of-gas, forfeits all gas to the miner).

But if programs complete quickly, they may consume very little gas. All unused
gas is returned to the sender. The minimum amount that can be consumed is
defined by `G_transaction`, currently 500 gas, which is the baseline price of
sending a message at all (before any opcodes have even been executed). An empty
program will thus yield about `500*gas_price`, and an exception-raising program
will yield `gas_limit*gas_price`.

An empty program will finish very quickly, using some constant overhead. A
complex program will take more CPU time, but is still roughly limited by
`gas_limit`. A tighter bound on CPU usage is not generally possible: some
special cases may be amenable to static analysis, but Turing-complete programs
cannot be analyzed completely by other Turing-complete programs. To do so would
be equivalent to solving the Halting Problem. They must simply be executed,
either to completion or until some threshold is exceeded.

So miners are given the following (loose) bounds, and must make their
profitability decisions on this limited information:

![mining profit diagram](./images/mining-profit-3.png)

One possibility is that `gas_price * G_transaction` is so high, and CPU time is
so cheap, that all reasonable (e.g. statically limited) values of `gas_limit`
result in profitable transactions. Miners can simply ignore messages with
`gas_limit` above some static value.

![mining profit diagram](./images/mining-profit-4.png)

This, however, does not give miners information about how *much* profit they
might make, so they cannot meaningly prioritize transactions. `gas_price` is
likely to serve as a proxy for the early days of mining: txns which offer a
higher `gas_price` are more likely to yield a larger profit.

_Recommendation: improve miner's abilities to predict their per-message income
and CPU consumption, so they can prioritize profitable transactions. Reduce the
size of the potential cost-vs-income rectangle in the diagram above._

### Inter-Message Constraints: Reordering Transactions for Fun(?) and Profit

Transactions are not actually independent: it may be necessary to include some
less-profitable or even unprofitable transactions to increase the profitability
of a subsequent transaction.

For example, since transactions include a per-sender sequence number, and these
must be applied in strictly incrementing order, the miner could be faced with
one high-cost low-income transaction `(from=ABC seqnum=5)`, followed by a
low-cost high-income transaction `(from=ABC seqnum=6)`. The miner cannot legally
include the second message without also including the first. They must evaluate
the profitability of the two as an indivisible pair.

Adjusting the order of different-sender messages may improve profits. Since
exceptions forfeit all gas to the miner, if there is an ordering of messages
that forces an exception, the miner would prefer exception-causing sequences
over ones that complete normally. Likewise, a sequence that causes execution to
consume more gas will yield more income than one which completes quickly (and
more profit, assuming the actual CPU costs are low). So, more sophisticated
miners may do more work: computing an optimal *ordered subset*, not merely an
optimal subset.

The costs of doing this analysis must not exceed the gains to be had. Finding an
optimal ordered subset is even more expensive (`O(n!)`) than an unordered
subset, but clever miners may find ways to make it worthwhile. These miners
would like enough information to efficiently choose a profit-optimal ordered
subset of the available messages.

_Recommendation: when designing contracts, guard against miners who may reorder
or drop messages to provoke exceptions and other undesirable outcomes (which are
profitable to the miner)_

### Gas Inaccuracies/Inadequacies

"Gas" is a fairly coarse measure of miner/verifier costs. It attempts to
compress the numerous forms of computation cost (CPU clock cycles, short-term
memory usage, long-term storage usage, etc) into a single scalar value.

There will inevitably be a number of under- and over-priced opcodes, for which
their arbitrarily-assigned "gas" value is not representative of their true
costs. For example, `G_sha3`, the cost of a basic SHA3 operation (before
including input size), is currently set to be 10 times the cost of a basic
one-cycle addition operation, despite being a vastly more complex operation that
takes thousands of CPU cycles. SHA3 may be an underpriced opcode. Also, the
actual processing cost of opcodes is unlikely to be identical for every miner or
verifier. For example, some verifier's machines may contain a SHA-2 coprocessor.

Contracts which use lots of underpriced opcodes may consume more actual CPU time
than the miner had first predicted: a low `gas_limit` doesn't necessarily mean
low CPU usage. Likewise, overpriced opcodes may yield more overall profit.

Storage costs are particularly difficult to measure with the same units one uses
for computation. Contract storage operations (`G_sset`) obligates the miner, and
all verifiers, to store a word of data *forever*. There is a kind of refund
mechanism that provides a weak incentive to free storage (`R_sclear`), but it is
local to a single message, and is unlikely to effective in prompting contract
authors to conserve storage space.

An ideal storage economic system would have contracts pre-pay for storage in
units of `byte*seconds`, with a facility to periodically renew leases on that
storage. However, this would add complexity.

_Recommendation: pay close attention to opcodes and VM features that may cost
significantly more than their assigned gas value suggests, long-term storage in
particular._

### DoS Prevention

The main motivation for denominating computational costs in gas is to prevent
Denial-Of-Service attacks, in which clients send transactions with infinite
loops, excessive recursion, or unwieldy memory consumption. Miners and verifiers
must all execute these programs.

Paying for "gas" obligates the client to pay for these resources. You can send
someone an infinite loop, but only if you send them infinite gas as well.
Sub-infinite consumption requires signifcant payment.

Establishing a universally-understood metric for "too much computation" is
important, because when a client forfeits their gas (by overrunning their
computational limit), the miner gets to claim that gas for themselves. To ensure
that the miner isn't merely pretending that the program was too hard to run, all
other miners and verifiers must run it for themselves, and confirm that it does
indeed not complete before the gas limit is reached. Everyone must agree on how
hard is "too hard", and the gas-counting VM provides that consistency.

However, some amount of overhead is incurred by each message before they have
had a chance to yield any gas income. Messages must be received from the
network, stored, their signatures must be checked, `gas_limit` and `gas_price`
must be evaluated, and the sending account balance must be checked for
underflow. Any messages which are rejected before reaching this point are pure
cost and zero income. DoS attacks which target these checks will not be
prevented by the gas system.

_Evaluation: the gas-based VM should be effective in preventing
transactional-complexity -based DoS attacks, but not more traditional attacks
that do not result in VM evaluation._

### Verifiers Must Just Follow Along

Non-mining Verifier nodes (which are expected to outnumber the miners
considerably) are responsible for executing all programs on the longest
blockchain, but get none of the income. Their only reward is being able to use
the currency with confidence. Miners, when they verify blocks produced by other
miners, have a similar situation: they must pay the cost of running those
programs, but get no gas income: their reward is the ability to continue mining
on the longest chain.

These verifiers do, however, have the benefit of being told total gas value used
by each block. This allows them to terminate the computation after a bounded
number of gas operations. They do not really have a choice of whether to perform
these operations or not, but they can probably determine how long it will take,
and will not need to put up with infinite loops.

Extremely lazy miners could simply ignore all new transactions, assume the
longest chain contains only valid transactions, and perform no validation of
their own. This would not improve their proof-of-work hashing power
significantly, and would be vulnerable to invalid blocks, but it would be
drastically simpler than a real miner.

_Recommendation: consider lazy non-verifying "miners" and make sure they do not
have a signifcant performance advantage over real ones. Messages with sufficient
gas income will help._


### Constraints, and the Lack Thereof

Until block-size or block-gas limits are hit, gas is mostly a tool to prevent
DoS. Prioritization becomes interesting once verification time is significant
(compared to mining or other tasks that compete for CPU), or block constraints
prevent inclusion of all transactions.

_Observation: we may not really understand the potential attacks or
misincentives until the system grows enough to impose significant constraints on
miners._

## <a name="clients"></a>   What Clients Want

_Summary: Predictable results, reliable execution, minimized cost risk._

Clients, who send transaction messages but do not run a miner, simply want to
use the digital currency. Their foremost concern is how much ETH they have, and
what will happen when they spend it. Basic transfers are straightforward, so
Ethereum's novelty is in triggering complex programmatic actions in response to
messages that bear currency.

### Predictability

Clients want predictability: when sending ETH to a contract that claims to
implement a Kickstarter-like escrow service, or a Namecoin-like allocation
service, clients want to know that the contract will actually behave the way it
was supposed to. This behavior includes contract state changes (e.g. the
requested name is actually reserved), what other contracts are executed as
subroutines, and how much gas is consumed in the process.

Failed predictions can result in unnecessary gas reservations, delayed
transactions, missed opportunities, or even financial losses.

Contract behavior, and thus transaction results, depends upon three things:

* the contract's code
* the message's contents and attached value
* the state of the data store when the contract is executed

The code is fixed, public, and can generally be analyzed ahead of time. The
message contents and value are entirely controlled by the sending client. But
the data store depends upon what other contracts have been executed recently.

This implies a race condition: between the time the client examines the stored
state of the contract they want to invoke, and the time their transaction is
accepted by a miner, other messages could be applied that change the state. 
This classic TOCTTOU (Time Of Check To Time Of Use) race is a constant source of
bugs in threaded programs.

The most significant failure mode is an exception, such as out-of-gas. In this
case, all gas ("gas_limit") is given to the miner, all other funds included with
the message (the message's "value") are delivered to the target contract, and
all other state changes are reverted. The receiving contract has no idea that
message delivery was attempted, except for the mysterious extra money in its
balance, and does not know who to refund the money to even if they wanted to.
This could leave funds in limbo, unretrievable by the sender, and invisible to
the recipient.

_Recommendation: Contract users should avoid exceptions at all costs. They must
study contracts carefully before sending money to them, treating the contract
and the miner as colluding antagonists who seek to cause an exception by any
means possible. Develop static-analysis tools to prove that contract execution
cannot result in an exception._

_Strong Recommendation: Change the exception-handling rule to revert all funds
(except gas) to the sender._

### Test-And-Set

A common mitigation for concurrency hazards like these is to use atomic
"Test-And-Set" operations. In the Ethereum context, messages could include a
block number, and the execution rules would state that the message could only be
included in that specific block. Or they could include the hash of the most
recent state vector, and could only be applied on top of that specific state.

This would result in a fixed total-ordering of the transaction list. Clients
would be able to exactly predict the results of their changes. They would also
be able to predict exactly how much gas was used by the computation, and set
`gas_limit` to precisely that quantity. The rule that unused gas gets returned
to the sender could be removed, because there would never be unused gas. Miners
would then know that they would receive exactly `gas_limit` units of income.

### Flexibility

However, an exactly-predicted system would be completely unusable for more than
a few clients. Large distributed systems do not deliver the state of the world
to all clients at the same time: everyone is slightly behind. Almost all clients
would find their test-and-set messages were constantly being rejected for an
out-of-date test vector. By demanding that the *entire* state is matched, the
system would be sensitive to the slightest of races, and most of these
transactions would never be applied.

In terms of the well-known CAP Theorem" of distributed databases, the "match
complete state" rule is roughly analogous to choosing 100% "C" (consistency) and
abandoning "A" (availability).

Clients are thus also interested in flexibility: the ability to get reasonable
work done without maintaining an up-to-the-moment copy of the entire Ethereum
state vector. This is the "A" in the CAP theorem.

The CAP theorem tells us that you cannot get perfect consistency and
availability at the same time (a distributed system must always provide "P"
partition tolerance). While Ethereum is not an exact match to the environment of
the theorem, this result still implies that we must decide upon a sensible
tradeoff between predictability and the ability to deliver transactions that are
highly likely to be applied.

A more-likely-to-succeed rule might be that the transaction would describe (and
thus test) the state of just the contract to which it is being sent. This could
be implemented by including the recipient "nonce" (sequence number) in the
message, and rejecting messages which arrive at a miner to find the wrong
seqnum. Unrelated messages could be executed in arbitrary order, and the strong
ordering requirements would only affect transactions that involve the same
target.

However, the target contract may call other contracts as subroutines, expanding
the amount of relevant state that could affect the results. Worse yet, the set
of subcontracts may not be static: the program may compute the address of the
subcontract depending upon the message contents, or upon the return value from
earlier subcontract execution. Getting this right for arbitrary programs is just
as impossible as the Halting Problem.

Finally, some inputs are not known to the sending client at all. The `COINBASE`
opcode returns an address, provided by the miner, to which the gas and block
reward will be delivered, for the block in which this message is being placed.
This will be different for each miner, so the resulting execution trace will
depend upon which miner wins the PoW race. It could be different for each block.
Any contract which uses this opcode will be harder to predict.

_Recommendation: consider low-cost ways to give senders more control over the
environment in which their messages are executed, including a receiver sequence
number (in addition to the current sender seqnum)_

### Limiting Gas Risk

For simple programs, with minimal conditional branches and use of subcontracts,
the client may be able to exactly predict how much gas is consumed. In this
case, they can supply a precise `gas_limit` and be confident that the
transaction will complete, with no gas returned.

However, if there is uncertainty, the client must supply a little bit extra.
This is a gamble, and there are risks on both sides. If the client provides too
little gas, they run the risk of an expensive out-of-gas exception (in which
they lose the gas, the entire transferred value, and accomplish no contract
actions).

If they provide too much, the chances of out-of-gas are reduced. Thanks to the
"unused gas is returned to the sender" rule, the extra gas is not lost. But
there is still an opportunity cost: the client must have that extra ETH
available, they must wait until the transaction is retired until they know how
much ETH they have left, and they cannot use that ETH for something better in
the meantime. Needing to keep extra money around, just in case, is a cost all by
itself, not unlike the costs of securing a loan or a line of credit.

And if something goes wrong and the computation gets stuck in an infinite loop,
the "little bit extra" will be lost. Imagine the simplicity of a rule where you
didn't need to predict the gas usage of a program, because the gas was simply
taken from the sender's account. Then imagine the panic of writing code in this
environment, where a trivial programming error could drain your entire wallet.
So providing too much gas is a risk too.

Clients want to maximize the chances that their transactions will be applied, in
a predictable way, without spending or risking too much currency in the process.

### Fast Transaction Resolution

Clients pay miners to include their transacations. Left to their own devices,
miners would prefer to ignore transactions: they're annoying to verify, require
significant bandwidth (both in and out), and long-term storage. A miner with
cheap electricity (e.g. Proof-of-Work costs are low), but expensive bandwidth,
may be very reluctant to fetch anything other than block headers. These "lame"
miners would simply publish empty blocks all day long.

Even well-connected miners might prefer to reduce their operating costs by
ignoring transactions. Clients must provide enough transaction income to
overcome this reluctance.

If a significant fraction of miners are accepting high-fee transactions but
ignoring low-fee ones, clients will achieve faster resolution by increasing
their fees. This effect is rapid: the outstanding txn with the highest fee
should appear in the very next block. This creates a market for resolution speed
that should self-regulate nicely.

If enough fee income is visible, the "lame" miners may decide it is worthwhile
to participate properly. This effect is slower, since full participation
requires more time to set up (changing software, acquiring storage and
bandwidth, etc). It is unclear whether this will produce a functioning market
equilibrium.

### Bribing Specific Miners

These client-to-miner payments are normally delivered as "gas". Clients could
also add a statically-detectable `SEND(COINBASE)` prologue, to send a quantity
that is more predictable (by the miner) than gas. Both mechanisms deliver the
same reward to any miner.

Clients might, for some reason, want to give preferential treatment to some
miners over the others. They could do this in several ways:

* include a `send()` to COINBASE if and only it equals a predetermined value
* clients could reveal a function output to their favorite miners, allowing the
miner to bypass the computation while pocketing all the gas (e.g. reveal a hash
preimage, for a program which does an exhaustive search). Everyone else would
have to burn more CPU to run the full program, but the favorite miner gets a
shortcut.

We expect that this is unavoidable: clients will always have a way to induce
non-uniform costs among competing miners. We are uncertain, but doubtful, that
this could be used for mischief.


## <a name="reconciling"></a>   Reconciling Goals

So the goals for our different parties are:

* System: stability, incentivized miners, confident clients
* Miners: predictable profits, protection from resource consumption attacks
* Clients: predictable transaction results and gas usage, availability

A totally-ordered exact-state test-and-set model would yield complete
predictability. Miners would achieve their goals: both CPU usage and gas income
would be known in advance, so they could select the most profitable transactions
to include. Clients would get predictable results and gas usage. However,
availability would be fatally lost. Even allowing miners to select which
transactions were applied would cause most subsequent messages to be rejected.

Whatever flexibility we allow clients, to reduce their state-observation burden
and improve transaction availability, will come at a cost of reduced
predictability for both miners and clients. The unpredictability of client gas
usage prompts us to include the "refund the unused gas" rule, to establish an
upper limit on client costs. But this means that miners income becomes
unpredictable, `gas_limit` is a frustratingly-useless maximum bound, and the
only thing providing the desired *minimum* bound is `G_transaction`.

In the beginning, this won't matter much. As with Bitcoin, most miner income
will come from the block reward, not transaction fees. But over time, if the
currency gains value, the fixed-ETH block reward will become less signifcant. As
contracts become more complex, and their gas costs are no longer dominated by
the 500-gas `G_transaction` baseline, the task of properly incentivizing miners
will depend upon providing them with good information about their costs and
income.

So in the future, Ethereum may benefit from mechanisms that allow a client to
make a clear promise of income to the miners. This may take the form of a
`min_gas` message parameter, which would make no promises about the execution
runtime, but *would* guarantee a minimum income for the miner. If the potential
CPU cost are low enough, this might provide enough information to allow miners
to prioritize transactions appropriately.

![mining profit diagram](./images/mining-profit-5.png)

`min_gas` could be hacked into the existing model with a recognizable function
epilogue that deliberately wastes gas until almost none is left. Something like:

```python
while GAS() > 5:
    NOP
RETURN
```

Miners could do just enough static analysis of a program to convince themselves
that 1) this epilogue exists, and 2) there are no return pathways that might
bypass it. If both are true, then they can expect to receive almost the entire
`gas_limit`, and one axis of their uncertain profit/loss model is reduced to a
small range. Since callers don't want to waste gas, they will probably try very
hard to accurately predict their usage, and this loop can be expected to run
very few times, so the runtime is probably bounded pretty well too. Miners who
recognize the epilogue could skip its execution, pocketing the gas money without
spending the cycles on the known-worthless computation.

Alternatively, since the goal is to pay the miners, the transaction could simply
transfer a balance to the COINBASE address at the very beginning of the
transaction. Barring exceptions, this would be easy to detect statically, and
provides a known income to the miner. If the actual gas used is small compared
to the known reward, the miner can better predict their profitability.

The use of such "in-band" hacks is inelegant, however, as it requires a certain
usage agreement between contract authors and miner implementations, which could
be signalled much more cleanly through an "out-of-band" parameter that requires
no program analysis.

_Recommendation: consider adding a `min_gas` to the message metadata, to provide
a predictable minimum income_


## Part 2: Transaction Execution and Contract Composition

## <a name="execution"></a>   Overview of Transaction Execution Model

The "Yellowpaper" (LaTeX source in https://github.com/ethereum/yellowpaper , and
compiled PDF at http://gavwood.com/Paper.pdf) is the primary specification for
Ethereum, the canonical reference that resolves any disagreements about how a
correctly-conforming implementation should behave.

Git revision `ed0b9c4d5c34da08b355e537012ef0faae024df4`, from the github
repository URL above, was the basis for most of this analysis. However some
portions may rely upon an earlier version, as the paper was modified during the
review period.

_Recommendation: find a way to include the git revision hash in the published
PDF._

Ethereum is pleasantly unusual for having its core behavior defined by
human-oriented prose. Many other systems (e.g. Bitcoin, perl, python) simply
declare that a specific implementation (usually the first, written by the
original system architect) should define the canonical behavior. This results in
"bug-for-bug compatible" reimplementations and ports, underspecified behavior,
and unnecessarily-machine-specific details being written into the spec (e.g.
alignment and byte-ordering).

Cryptocurrencies inherently depend on mutually-agreed-upon behaviors among
diverse parties. A strong, precise, and readable specification enables multiple
implementations to interoperate. Subtle differences in behaviors can result in
painful blockchain forks years down the road, and security vulnerabilities as
one party interprets unusual transactions differently than another.

The yellowpaper does an admirable job of capturing everything one needs to know
to write a compatible implementation. Ethereum is very complex, so this is no
easy feat.

However the paper is dense, intricate, and difficult to follow. Our team
required intense study to determine the expected behavior. It uses a wide
variety of notation, which hampers legibility: multiple typefaces, English and
Greek characters, subscripts, square-bracket indexing, superscript-prime,
superscript-star, superscript-double-star, etc. We feel a some simple
alterations to the document could dramatically increase readability, such as
avoiding overlapping/shadowing variable names, reducing or better explaining
recursive definitions, and mitigating the forward- and backward- references.

<!--- We are concerned that the difficulty of comprehending the yellowpaper will
lead to inconsistent implementation behaviors, especially in new clients that
have not yet been written, whose developers may not consult the core community
which wrote the (most "official") Go and C++ codebases.
 Concern noted, however Java and Javascript implementations were written from
the ground-up using just the Yellow Paper, and acheived substantial success.--->

Implementation consensus bugs will probably be caught with good testing
practices and a large number of independent implementations, however we would
feel better if the primary specification were easier to follow. Ethereum is not
simple and cannot be described simply, and while it is possible to build a
fully-compatible implementation by reading only the formal specification, we
feel that current and future implementors would be well-served by contributing
and improving its readability.
# Reworded to concur with the previous statement that it contains everything
needed for a compatible impl.

_Recommendations to improve the specification:_

* Use pseudocode instead of equations
* Use property-access instead of subscripts (`txn.value` instead of `T sub(v)`)
* Use multi-character variable names instead of overloaded Greek letters
* Avoid reusing symbol names in different contexts (formal- vs actual-
parameters). A given symbol should have the same meaning in all occurrences.
Related values (such as the gas provided with a message, distinguished from the
gas provided to execute a specific sub-function) should have related names, like
`message_gas` vs `execution_gas`.
* Function names should be unique, and their definitions should be clearly
marked. Argument lists should be consistent. E.g. section 8 "Message Call"
invokes upon the Xi function (in equation 99, rev cdc8499), and appears to
receive four return values. The Xi function is defined (with six return values)
in equation 109, and again (in terms of an "X" function, with four return
values) in equation 110. These could be rewritten as pseudocode-style function
prototypes (`(ret1,ret2) = function X(arg1,arg2)`), and the forward reference
could be marked with the equation number (or page/section) of the eventual
definition.

As an example, section 8 "Message Call", (equations 98-99 in revision cdc8499 on
20-Apr-2015) currently reads:

![yellowpaper example](./images/yellowpaper-orig.png)

and could be rewritten to look somewhat like:

```python
def get_code(address):
    if a == 1: return ECREC
    if a == 2: return SHA256
    if a == 3: return RIP160
    if a == 4: return ID
    return accounts[address].code_bytes

# returns (newstate, remaining_gas)
def run_message(state, sender, originator, recipient, code_account,
                avail_gas, value, gas_price, input_data, current_stackdepth):
    exception_rollback_state = state.copy() # no funds moved yet
    state.accounts[sender].value -= value
    state.accounts[recipient].value += value
    try:
        (newstate, remaining_gas,
         suicide_list, output) = execute(state, avail_gas,
                                         owner_address=sender,
                                         originator_address=originator,
                                         gas_price=gas_price,
                                         input_data=input_data,
                                         sender_address=sender, value=value,
                                         code_bytes=get_code(code_account),
                                         current_block_header=xyz,
                                         stack_depth=current_stackdepth)
        return (newstate, remaining_gas)
    except CodeException:
        state = exception_rollback_state
        state.accounts[sender].value -= avail_gas * gas_price
        return (state, avail_gas)

# returns (newstate, remaining_gas, suicide_list, log_series, refunds,
#          output_data)
def execute(oldstate, gas, owner_address, originator_address, gas_price,
            input_data, sender_address, value, code_bytes,
            current_block_header, stack_depth):
    ...
```

* Consider using diagrams to show function inputs and outputs
* Find a better format for the opcode definition table (appendix H.2), perhaps
`GAS: () -> (exec.remaining_gas)` or `ADD: (a, b) -> (a+b)` instead of referring
to `mu prime sub s [0]`
* Define the gas costs in the opcode table

_Recommendation: consider commissioning a dedicated technical writer to produce
a longer-form specification document, and declare it to be the canonical
protocol authority._


### Transaction Execution Basics

* **Transactions**: Every update to the blockchain state is initiated by a
transaction. A transaction must be initiated by a user account with a public key
(and not by a contract acting on its own), and is signed by the corresponding
private key. A transaction must indicate a gas price `P` (in units of _ether per
gas_) and a gas limit `G` (in units of _gas_); at the beginning of transaction
execution, `P*G` ether units are deducted from the user's account, and `G` gas
units in total are available for executing the transaction.
* **Message calls**: A transaction indicates an initial recipient. If the
recipient is another user account, then no virtual machine execution is needed,
the account balances are simply updated. However, if the recipient is a
contract, then code must be executed. When a contract sends a message to another
contract, a new execution context is pushed onto the call stack. The caller sets
aside a portion of its available gas to be used by the callee - even if the
callee crashes, it can use at most this portion; if it uses less than that
limit, the difference (in gas) is refunded to the caller.
* **Closing list**: When a contract executes a _close_ (aka `SUICIDE`), its
address is added to a list. Closed contracts are deleted at the end of
transaction execution.
* **Refund counter**: In the case that storage cells are freed (i.e. a zero is
written to a location that previously had a non-zero value), this counter is
incremented. When execution is finished, some portion of this counter is
refunded to the sender. This incentivizes conservation (deallocation) of storage
space. These "refunds" will not allow a computation to exceed the `gas_limit`,
nor can they reduce the ETH spent on gas to drop below (or even to) zero.
* **Exceptions**: While a contract executes a message, there are 4 "Exceptional
Halting" states: insufficient-gas, bad-opcode, stack-underflow, and
bad-jumpdest. If one of these occurs, message execution is terminated, all gas
is given to the miner, and **all remaining message value is left with the
recipient**. When the message is processed as part of a subroutine, the caller
can tell that the child contract executed with an exception, but they cannot
retrieve the funds sent into the child. When the message is being processed due
to a top-level transaction, the sender must follow the published block chain to
discover the fate of their message.

_Observation: the yellowpaper seems inconsistent on the issue of
call-stack-overflow. Equation (113) does not mention the call-stack size, but
the prose afterwards claims that call-stack-overflow is an exceptional halting
state (Z=true). The Appendix H.2 definition of CALL on page 28 suggests that
call-stack-overflow merely pushes an error indication onto the data stack. We
believe the latter: call-stack-overflow is not an exception._

_Recommendation: in serpent, change `tx.gas` to `msg.gas`, as it is a property
of the message execution rather than the transaction._

_Recommendation: replace the instruction name "suicide" with a less connotative
word like "self-destruct", "destroy", "terminate", or
["close"](https://www.translegal.com/lesson/7035), especially since that is a
term describing the natural conclusion of a contract._ We'll use "close"
throughout our report.

The refund counter will only incentivize the deallocation of space if this
occurs during a complex transaction (which can benefit from the gas refund).
Callers will never send a single message just to deallocate space, since they
must pay `G_transaction` just to send the message, and "refunds" will not
actually give the sender any money.

_Evaluation: the "refund counter" mechanism is insufficient to encourage
deallocation of storage space. This storage pool, which must be tracked by all
verifiers, forever, represents Ethereum's largest long-term execution cost, and
it is important to keep it as small as possible. Although complex, a pre-paid
renewable "rental" model, denomimated in byte*seconds, is more likely to protect
against unnecessary growth of the storage pool, and accidental "leaks" of
storage space to abandoned contracts. A similar mechanism may be warranted to
expire contracts themselves. Ideally the state vector should only include active
contracts, not forgotten leftovers._

### Signature Ambiguity

The account public key can be used to verify transactions and identify the
sender. It may also be used, outside of the Ethereum codebase, to verify other
statements signed by the holder of the account's private key. For example, when
someone starts a crowdfunded project, they will need to create two accounts. The
first is a normal public-key account, to which the ETH will be delivered if and
when the funding goal is reached. The second is the contract account which
implements the threshold/refund mechanism and embeds the address of the first
account where everyone can see.

Then, the project lead will publish a message, outside the blockchain, signed by
the first account's public key, identifying themselves and describing the
project goals. This assures donors that they are funding the *right* project, or
at least a project that claims to do what they want to fund. Later, if the
project is funded, that person will use the same key to sign a transaction
message, to spend the funds.

It is important that these signed non-transactions can be distinguished from
signed transactions. Otherwise, the system will be vulnerable to confusion
attacks, where the signed project description gets fed to a miner and
misinterpreted as a signed transaction. It might seem unlikely that English text
could produce useful results when interpreted as a transaction, but similar
format-confusion bugs have yielded serious attacks against other systems.
SQL-injection attacks are in this category, as are web attacks in which
executable content (Flash programs) are hidden as plain image files.

There are two standard defenses against this attack. The first is to never sign
a raw message: instead, always prepend a "purpose" string to the message before
signing. Different purposes (project description vs transaction) get different
purpose strings; frequently a domain name or URL is used to avoid accidental
collisions without explicit coordination.

The purpose prefix must be prepended unambiguously: it must not be possible for
`prefix1+msg1` to equal `prefix2+msg2`, otherwise the prefix itself is a
format-confusion bug. Fixed-length purposes can be simply concatenated, but are
annoying to use. Purpose strings that specifically omit a given character can be
join with that character as a delimiter (e.g. the purpose is a URL, and the
delimiter is a newline). A length prefix can be used for finite-length purpose
strings with arbitrary contents (0x00-0xff). If the purpose string is truly
arbitrary-length, then the only viable technique is to escape the delimiter
wherever it appears.

This approach requires the purpose-string prefix be used from the very
beginning: it cannot be added later. Each purpose lives in a non-overlapping
branch of a parse tree (where the root is a completely random message). Once a
portion is claimed, it cannot be used for other purposes.

The second defense technique is to use a keyed hash function, and use a
different key for each purpose. Instead of signing the transaction message `T`
with a plain unkeyed hash function (`hash(msg=T)`), use a keyed hash function,
and sign `hash(key=purpose, msg=T)`. This approach imposes no restrictions on
the purpose string, nor on the format of the message. It too must be deployed
from the very beginning, for the same reasons.

_Recommendation: change the signing function (`h(T)` in appendix F of the
whitepaper) to use a keyed hash, such as HMAC-SHA256._

### Unexpected Storage Costs

Storage operations may incur much greater actual costs than their assigned gas
value suggests. Certain pathological sequences can put the storage trie in a
non-optimal configuration, resulting in worst-cast traversal costs.


#### Creating Worst-Case Storage Layout

By choosing keys with deliberate patterns, a contract can cause the storage trie
to become significantly unbalanced. Afterwards, storage operations will cost
significantly more CPU than their gas price would suggest. This could be used as
a DoS attack against miners.

![Illustration of worst-case trie layout](./images/illustration_badlayout.png)

_Recommendation: consider using `hash(key)` rather than `key` in storage trie to
prevent users from "stacking" the storage in a poor configuration. The
(significant) downside is that the trie would become completely sparse, losing
the trie's space-saving key-compression properties._

_Recommendation: alternately, determine the gas cost of storage operations
assuming a worst-case layout._

We made a tool to visualize Tries in graphviz, which is useful for illustrating
and understanding the structure of the tries given varying inputs.
[trie_debug.py](examples/trie_debug.py)

#### Reverting Storage Deletions

Similarly, making changes (even deletions) to an unbalanced trie is expensive,
although the gas cost for it is zero (and even refunds some gas for the current
message).

```python
def waste_steps(n_):
  with n = n_:
    with i = 0:
      while i < n:
	    self.storage[i] = 0  # These steps are cheap
		i += 1
	invalid()               # Revert the state by throwing exception
```

_Recommendation: change the cost of storage deletions cost so that **reverted**
deletions are not underpriced. This can be done by charging deletions the same
as modifications, and adding the corresponding ether amount (`gas * gasprice`)
to the refund register._

#### Abusing the Storage Refund Mechanism

The storage refund mechanism (defined in equation (61) in the yellowpaper as of
Feb 28) provides an incentive to clear out no-longer-needed storage. The intent
is that this refund has already been paid for in advance, because of the extra
gas used to initialize the storage in the first place. However, the gas price at
the time of clearing the storage need not be the same as the gas price at the
beginning. An attacker could plausibly exploit this by initializing a large
amount of storage at a very low gas price, and later using it to claim refunds
at a higher gas price. The exact implementation of the refund mechanism limits
the profitability of this - the refund can not be used to print more ether than
was put in at the beginning of the transaction, and can only reduce the
effective gas cost of a transaction by up to 50%. However, even this 50%
discount could conceivably cause the storage incentive to backfire. An attacker
might 'squat' on a large amount of storage by initializing it to nonzero, either
during a time when the market price of gas is low, or with collusion from a
miner. If the market gas price later goes up, this stockpile of squatted storage
can be valuable. Exacerbating this, the verification cost of this squatting
might be made low if a convention is recognized. Consider this fragment of code:
```python
  # precondition: self.storage is all 0
  i = 0
  while i < 100:
     self.storage[i] = 1
	 i += 1
```
The gas cost, and the change to the state vector after executing this fragment,
assuming the precondition holds, is always the same for every contract, and thus
could be executed in constant time by any verifier.

#### Miner-vs-Miner Storage Bombs

As suggested above, a miner could produce a block with a single (large)
transaction, which did nothing but fill a large amount of storage. They could
set `gas_price` to 1 Wei (its lowest possible value), and provide just enough
ETH to fund the transaction (which they immediately recover in full). By
pre-computing the root hash of the contract storage, they can do this once per
block with minimal overhead.

Other miners, and non-mining verifiers, are obligated to store this full
dataset, while the original miner can simply recognize the Merkle root and
synthesize the contents when necessary. Nobody else can change the dataset,
since the attacking miner defined the contract which could do so.

A more sophisticated approach would involve a dataset whose values are
pseudo-randomly generated from a secret key. The attacking miner could use the
secret key to regenerate the storage as necessary, while other miners would have
to store the entire (non-compressible) data.

This is a miner-vs-miner attack: imposing costs on other miners to slow them
down.

The attack is constrained by `G_sset` (the cost of storage operations) and the
moving-average per-block `max_gas` limit (which will rise in response to this
attack, making it more damaging over time). A brief calculation suggests that
this attack could add 768MB per day to the storage load.

(using max-gas of 1e6 from the current v0.8.5 go-ethereum codebase
core/genesis.go, a `G_sset` of 300 gas, and a target block time of 12 seconds:
1e6/300 = 3333 words of storage added per block, 32 bytes per word, 7200 blocks
per day, `3333*32*7200 = 768MB`)

The core problem is this: gas economics assume that rewards are shared uniformly
among miners (in proportion to their PoW power), and costs are the same for all
miners. However miners can insert their own transactions which don't reward
anybody (the gas returns to themselves, and no other miners get to see the loose
transaction, so they have no chance of earning the gas), and cost more for the
other miners to verify.

We are uncertain how to fix this properly. The solution will probably include
the winning miner being obligated to give some of their gas to other
(subsequent) miners, to remove the "I pay myself so it's free" property.

#### Reducing Miner/Verifier Storage Costs

One (incomplete) mitigation is for miners to stop storing the complete state,
and instead they merely store the hash of each account. Clients would be
required to send them the missing state data with each transaction. When miners
publish blocks to verifiers and other miners, they include the additional data
next to the blockchain. This shifts the burden of storage from the receiving
miner/verifier to the sending client/miner, at the cost of complexity in the
protocol.

Willing clients can already do this "in-band": the contract can keep just the
hash of their state in contract storage. Each client would be obligated to
include the current state in their message, and the contract would check its
hash before doing anything else. The contract would then run its normal
computation, determine the new state, hash it, store the hash, then throw away
the state (which clients would compute for themselves externally). The savings
depend upon the relative values of `G_sreset`, `G_txdatanonzero`, `G_sload`, and
`G_sha3`.

Further reductions could be obtained by only storing the root of the entire
account tree, and require senders to include the Merkle-tree "uncle" nodes
necessary to verify the claimed dataset's presence in that tree. Since
transaction evaluation causes one or more account states to be modified (every
account which receives a message is touched), the miner also needs to know the
uncle nodes for all modified accounts, so it can recompute the new dataset hash
root. This has been
[discussed](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=314467.msg3371194#msg3371194)
in the Bitcoin world.

The storage could be further outsourced: lightweight clients could pay an
archival service for the necessary storage, and retrieve it just before
delivering the transaction to the miner. Or clients could send just their
transaction to the archival service, and ask them to look up and attach the
necessary data, before forwarding it directly to the miner.

#### Reducing Storage Itself

Shifting the responsibility for storage to clients who care about it is useful,
but the necessary protocol changes may be complex. A complimentary approach is
to remove the storage altogether. Currently, storage can only be deleted if a
contract chooses to delete it. Otherwise it lives until the contract
self-destructs, which is also entirely controlled by the contract. 

This can easily result in contracts and data which are useless, broken, or
abandoned, never to be used again, but consuming space in the Merkle tree and
increasing computational load for everybody, forever. The gas-for-storage
mechanism discourages the creation of this obligation, but does not adequately
incentivize its release.

A more direct approach is to make storage (and contracts) decay. Contracts would
be obligated to pay "rent" for storage, in the form of a counter that can be
increased with ETH sends and decrements with every block. Contracts themselves
would be kept alive with ETH.

This is related to a high-level economic concern about lost private keys, and
the effect of this "money leak" on the inflation rate. One suggestion in the
Bitcoin world has been to have BTC revert to the miners if it is not moved on a
regular basis. A more sophisticated scheme could allow accounts (and contracts)
to pre-specify a "beneficiary" to which its value would go if/when it expires,
just like a will that disposes of a person's estate when they die.


### Exceptions

Our current understanding of the VM execution model (complicated by divergent
behavior of the pyethereum implementation, errors in the specification, and
changes to the yellowpaper during review) is that there are exactly four things
that can cause a program to terminate with an exception:

* insufficient gas
* bad opcode
* stack underflow
* bad jump destination

When one of these exceptions occur, execution of the current message (top-level
transaction or CALL operation) is abandoned, all gas is given to the miner, and
any remaining money is left with the *receiving contract*. All other state is
rewound to the start of the CALL or message delivery. The recipient has no
memory of the message, except for the mysterious extra ETH in its account, with
no record of the sender to refund it to. For CALL operations, the caller learns
of the exception, but has no way to recover the funds that were sent. This may
lead to money being lost, and will be difficult for both sender and receiver to
deal with.

For this reason, the VM's exceptions are not a general-purpose programming tool.
Higher-level languages which wish to provide Python- or C++-like exception
handling will need to build their own mechanisms, and not rely upon Ethereum's.
Unfortunately, the low-level exceptions are not fatal to the entire
(multi-contract) transaction, like Java's uncatchable out-of-memory "error"
would be. And miners may be willing to find ways to deliberately provoke
exceptions, by omitting or rearranging messages, to increase their gas income.

So calling programs will generally want to avoid exceptions. Static analysis can
prove that bad opcodes will not occur, at for contracts that do not make use of
the VM's dynamic-code execution feature. Higher level languages will not trigger
stack-underflow or bad-jump-destination when compiled correctly, so callers with
access to the source code can get confidence that these will not happen.
Insufficient gas and call-stack overflow (see below) are more difficult to
detect ahead of time, and static analysis may only be useful for the simplest of
programs.

**Strong Recommendation: We recommend that exceptions cause all value to be
returned to the sender, not the recipient.** The present behavior of rewinding
state, but leaving the value with the **recipient**, makes it dangerous to
compose contracts. It should be easy for one contract to call out to a second
one, detect whether the second raised an exception, and then raise an exception
itself, thus unwinding all state changes and posing no risk of removing funds
from the first contract.

This implies that an explicit "RAISE EXCEPTION" opcode would be useful, perhaps
using a reserved-as-invalid opcode, and higher-level languages should provide
access to it (e.g. serpent provides `invalid()`).


### Callstack Depth Limit Errors

The CALL opcode (used to send messages to other contracts, or send funds to
non-contract accounts) will fail if it causes the call stack to exceed 1024
frames. This is not an exception: instead, the CALL operation indicates an
error, instead of returning data from the callee contract.

These errors cannot be disproved by static analysis, as the available number of
call-stack frames depends upon the exact runtime environment. Consider the
following simple example:

```python
def get_free_money():
    # A friendly-seeming contract that gives the sender free money!
	send(msg.sender, msg.value * 2)
```

Someone could trick an autonomous agent into calling `get_free_money()` at the
end of a very long call stack, such that the `send` fails, and the agent would
lose its money to this contract.

To program defensively against this, the agent would need to inspect the current
callstack depth and make sure that there are enough stack frames remaining to
safely send messages to this contract. If the target contract is known to only
use one stack frame, it is sufficient to call a pair of dummy functions first.
If that fails, we know we will not be able to call `get_free_money()` (and its
internal `send()`) successfully.

```python
def nop1():
    send(nop2, 0)
def nop2():
    return
def call_get_free_money(X):
    if send(nop1, 0) == ERROR:
        return
    if balance(get_free_money) > 2*X:
        send(get_free_money, X)
```

This could be generalized to other depths with recursion.

_Recommendation: add an opcode for inspecting the current callstack depth._

A better defense, if our suggestion to change exceptions to refund value to the
caller is adopted, is to use an exception to unwind all state:

```python
def call_get_free_money(X):
    if send(get_free_money, X) == ERROR:
        raise
```


## <a name="hazards"></a>   Hazards of Composing Contracts

Contracts, which can send messages to each other, represent mutually-distrusting
parties which nevertheless want to cooperate. The lessons of the
object-capability community (starting with those presented in [Mark Miller's
thesis](http://www.erights.org/talks/thesis/index.html)) are especially
relevant. We anthropomorphise these programs, and say "they" wish to cooperate
without exposing themselves to unnecessary risks.

To enable this, programs (or, more likely their authors) want to predict what
will happen when they send a message to another program. Unpredictability means
risk. Exceptions are particularly risky.

### Case Study: The Crowfunding Contract Example

The crowfund example is posted in the
[github.com/ethereum/serpent](https://github.com/ethereum/serpent/) repository
in
[examples/crowdfund.se](https://github.com/ethereum/serpent/blob/master/examples/crowdfund.se)
. In this example, when there is a refund event, the contract uses the gas of
the last contribution message to deliver refunds to all senders. If any of the
donors are contracts, the refund process will require gas too.

There are useful parallels between this refund loop and the publish-subscribe
function illustrated in Miller's thesis. He demonstrates several hazards that
are present when the `publish` callbacks are run synchronously:

* exceptions raised during the callback would prevent execution of later
callbacks
* reentrancy hazards if the callback itself executes publish(), subscribe(), or
unsubscribe(): repeated actions, missing actions, and inconsistent delivery of
messages

Some analogous issues in the crowdfund example are:

* delivering a contribution, after the funding deadline, with just enough gas to
allow some refunds to go through, but not all: the contract could be left in a
state where it was unable to refund the remaining contributions
* if the refund was triggered by a contract at the end of a long call stack, the
`send` instructions will fail. However the example appears to ignore the return
value of the `send`, so execution will continue. All records will be cleared,
and the funds can never be recovered.
* the refund callback could make a new donation, triggering another refund
cycle, potentially double-refunding the earlier contributions, or failing to
refund later ones

It is usually possible to protect against these hazards with careful state
management, and the crowdfunding example does a pretty good job. But this is
difficult even in a normal programming environment, and experience has shown
that better languages and tools are needed to improve the security of the
average (busy, overworked) programmer. Ethereum's additional potential for
out-of-gas or call-stack-overflow exceptions provides an extra level of
challenges.

The object-capability community addresses this class of hazards by using the
"eventual-send" operation whenever possible, which queues the message for
delivery *after* the current function has run to completion. By disassociating
the call stacks of caller and callee, the cross-object control flow becomes
predictable, and independent of the behavior of the callee.

_Recommendation: investigate and adopt practices from the objcap community._

The programming examples provided so far are inadequate to convey best-practices
for writing safe contracts and coping with the gas mechanism. Introductory C++
textbooks frequently omit error checking for the sake of readability, and have
resulted in countless security bugs. Ethereum's examples must teach better
habits.

_Recommendation: provide many more examples of thorough defensive contract
programming._


### Static Analysis and Conventions

We anticipate a market need for static-analysis tools, to protect users from
misbehavior (deliberate or otherwise) of the contracts to which they send money.
These tools would take a contract (either as code, or as the address of a
previously-created contract), and some optional input/state constraints, and
attempt to deduce how much gas it will consume, and how many call stack frames
it will need. The caller can then be sure to include enough gas when invoking
the contract, and refrain from calling it in an environment that might cause a
exceed the call depth limit.

As the contract language is Turing-complete, this analysis is necessarily
incomplete: there are an infinite number of programs for which the tool will
output "cannot analyze". However, many useful programs *can* be analyzed in this
fashion, and callers should prefer to use analyzable ones.

It may be possible to add annotations to the (high-level) source code to
facilitate this analysis. For example, a subroutine could be marked with its
claimed maximum gas and stack depth, and the language could insert runtime
checks to enforce this precondition. The tool could then just check for the
presence of the runtime checks. In general, tools should strive to work at as
high a level (in the compilation chain) as possible, where there is more
information about the program's claimed intentions.

The analysis may result in a maximum bound on the gas consumed, rather than an
exact figure, when behavior depends upon message inputs or current state. The
tool could be given this data to improve the precision of the analysis ("if I
were to send message XYZ to contract ABC, what's the worst-case gas
consumption?", as opposed to "if I sent *any* message to ABC, what will
happen?").

Contract composition would be facilitated with an analysis tool. Contract
authors could run this tool to confirm they are publishing predictable contrcts
for others to use. Message senders can use it to make sure they're providing
enough gas with their transactions.


## <a name="missing"></a>   Missing Features

The Ethereum execution model is missing a few features that would improve the
expressivity and functionality of the system. We believe these features will
require careful consideration, as they are not without risks, but expect they
will prove to be useful in the future.

* Timers / cronjobs: a contract could pay to have a message delivered at some
point in the future, perhaps to itself. This would require an authenticated data
structure with all pending timed messages, so everyone could agree when they
must be executed. The current system requires an external party to trigger all
actions.

* Eventual-send: like a zero-delay timer: the message is sent immediately
following the completion of the current contract. This allows all synchronous
execution to finish, removing reentrancy hazards from the execution model. It
would also allow activity to span multiple blocks. In the objcap world, results
are returned via objects called "Promises": these would look very different in
the Ethereum environment.

* Well-defined ordering for queued messages: it should be possbile to send two
messages to two different contracts and ensure that they will execute in a
specific order. At present, this order can only be enforced when sending two
messages from the same sender.

* Allow contracts to pay for their own gas.

### Self-Fueled Contracts

This last feature deserves more consideration. In the current design, all
activity (contract execution) must be triggered by a non-contract "simple"
account sending a message of some sort. This initial message, sent from outside
the miners (using knowledge of a secret signing key), provides the gas for *all*
the contract execution that results. The system is somewhat like a mechanical
calculator (think Babbage's Difference Engine): it must be cranked from the
outside, and when the human stops turning the wheel, all motion stops.

Allowing contracts to pay for their own gas would be like introducing wind-up
springs that store energy: actions could keep going for a while, using the
stored gas and some form of timer to trigger message delivery. The
implementation would probably involve a change to the CALL opcode, making it
accept `new gas amount` (in units of gas) and `new gas price` (as ETH-per-GAS)
in addition to the current "how much of our gas should be given to the call"
value. The new gas would be purchased using the contract's balance, and added to
the quantity taken from the execution environment.

The crowdfunding contract, when a refund is triggered, presents two useful
examples. First, the contract needs to "wake up" after the block-height timeout
has passed. The current design depends upon someone outside the system (with a
non-contract account) sending a message that includes enough gas to pay for the
execution of the refund code. It could be nice if this would happen
automatically. The contract would use some of its initial ETH to schedule a
"wake-up call" after the timeout, which would be cancelled if the funding goal
is reached and refunds become unnecessary.

Second, it was previously mentioned that donors which are themselves contract
accounts present a problem for refunds: the act of refunding the money will cost
gas, which must come from the message that triggers the refund. Instead, donors
could earmark a portion of their donation for use in the refund process. Each
donation would indicate how much gas the refund address requires, and the
crowdfunding refund subroutine would deduct that ETH from the refunded amount
before sending the rest to the contract (analogous to a "self-addressed stamped
envelope" in a real-world postal service). The refund trigger would use a fixed
amount of gas, independent of how much the donor's contracts required
themselves.

This would work even better (more efficient for the donors) if the unused gas
could be directed to the *receiver*, rather than the *sender*.

This feature would also allow contracts to pick up additional gas after
execution starts. The caller could provide just enough to let the contract get
started, then the contract would pay for the rest. It could modify its execution
depending upon how much computation the balance will cover. This could enable a
contract that performs a long-running computation, executing as many work units
as possible until it runs out of funds. People could donate funds to the work
(using messages that include minimal gas) without needing to know how much gas
the computation will take.

There are multiple challenges with this feature:

* The gas-must-come-from-outside property is probably an important safety
feature. It may prevent runaway contracts that spew messages uncontrollably.

* Miners want assurance that their CPU costs will be paid. Gas that comes from a
contract's balance may depend upon that contract execution not being rewound
after an exception. Contracts could be arranged in such a way that miners were
unable to recoup their expenses. This would open up a DoS vector that gas is
supposed to prevent. It may be necessary to introduce a new checkpointing
mechanism to protect miners: there must be a point where reliable funds have
been transferred to the miner, that occurs *before* gas-limited computation is
performed.

* Deciding upon a `gas_price` is non-trivial. Normal (human) senders choose this
according to prevailing market price for a given speed of execution. Contracts
may not have enough information to select a competitive price.

* There are new error conditions to deal with: in the crowdfunding example, what
should it do when an attempt to refund a donation fails from insufficient gas?
Note that this interacts with our recommendation to have exceptions return funds
to the sender (caller), rather than leaving them with the receiver (callee). If
the receiver keeps the funds, then a failed refund execution still leaves the
money in the hands of the donor (although their contract may not realize it). If
the sender keeps the funds, then a failure leaves the money with the
crowdfunding contract (which might be smart enough to try again later, with more
gas, or might forget that it still needs to be refunded). Return-to-sender does
at least give the sender the chance to fix things.

#### document source

This file generated from https://github.com/LeastAuthority/ethereum-analyses .
